From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. [music]
This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> On Wednesday, the US charged Cuba's
[music] former leader and communist
general Raul Castro with murder. The
charges stem from Castro's role in a
decades-old [music] incident when three
Americans were killed by the Cuban
government, and they were the latest
escalation [music] in the Trump
administration's campaign to force
political change on the island.
>> [music]
>> Today, my colleague Frances Robles on
the story behind the charges against
Castro, and Julian Barnes
>> [music]
>> on what the American government really
wants from Cuba.
It's [music] Thursday, May 21st.
Frenchie, welcome back to the show.
Thanks for having me, Natalie. You just
got out of this Department of Justice
press conference in Miami. You are in
fact still in your car, and we
appreciate you making the time. So, tell
us what it was like.
It was so interesting. I've been
covering judicial events and press
conferences and court cases and
announcements for many, many years, and
I can't say I've ever seen one quite
like this. Usually, these are held at,
you know, either at a courthouse or an
office, maybe the district attorney's
office or the DOJ. So, they held it at
the Freedom Tower. So, that's the first
thing that was really fascinating. It's
a really important historic building in
Miami. It's kind of a cool, old-looking
tower. And the reason it's an important
location is because
in the 1960s and the early '70s, it was
the Cuban refugee center. So, it's
basically Ellis Island for Cuban exiles.
It was the first stop for many, many
thousands of people who left Cuba after
the revolution and came to live in
Miami. So, a lot of symbolism there for
people.
>> Oh, 100% a lot of symbolism. And not
only that, this event was held uh today
is Wednesday, May 20th, which is Cuban
Independence Day. So, that's uh you
know, symbolism squared for this event.
An event where hundreds of people came
to attend. Politicians, mayors, federal
prosecutors who haven't worked there in
decades. I mean, it was a who's who of
the Cuban exile community of Miami. It
was the place to be. Absolutely.
Okay, and what happens at this event?
How do the charges get rolled out? Good
afternoon. I'm Madeline Pumariega,
president of Miami Dade College. Welcome
to the Freedom Tower. I was kind of
struck, to be honest, that the first
speaker was Madeline Pumariega, who's a
Cuban-American woman, the president of
Miami Dade College. The building that we
were in is part of Miami Dade College.
And so, it was interesting to me because
she's a very prominent member of the
community. But, she's not a prosecutor.
So, it told you a lot. It says that this
isn't just a   judicial
or law enforcement event. This is a
community event. And to our brothers and
sisters in Cuba, we hear you. Freedom
will come. Cuba will be liberated.
important event to the city of Miami and
the people in this entire community who
have been waiting 30 years for this day.
>> [applause]
>> It is now my distinct honor,
representing all of you,
to introduce
the United States Acting Attorney
General, Todd Blodgett. And she
introduced the Attorney General, the
Acting Attorney General, Todd Blodgett.
The hundreds of people in the room got
up and gave him a standing ovation
before the man even opened his mouth.
Everybody was cheering him on because
they knew what he was about to say.
Thank you. Thank Thank much. It's great
to be here in the great state of
Florida.
And what did he say? Yeah, he got right
into it. Today,
we are announcing
an indictment
charging Raul Castro
and several others with conspiracy to
kill US nationals.
One of his first words were conspiracy
to kill US nationals. And they had some
break after that because everyone got up
on to their feet and started applauding
him again.
And he just started reading out the
charges. Mr. Castro and the others are
charged with additional crimes as well,
including destruction of aircraft and
four
individual counts of murder. He was
being charged with conspiracy to kill US
nationals,
two counts [music] of destruction of
aircraft, and four counts of murder.
>> [music]
>> And just explain what these charges are
really about. What is the incident that
they're referring to
when they talk about murder?
The incident that this case is about
occurred in 1996.
But really, to tell that story, I'm
going to go back further. I'm going to
go a little early in the '90s. There was
a point in the '90s where Cubans were
literally throwing themselves to the sea
to make it to the United States.
They were doing that on inner tubes.
They were doing that on old cars that
they rebuilt into a boat, on on rafts.
And so it becomes what's known as the
Cuban rafter crisis because there's so
many people, literally thousands and
thousands of people that were in the sea
trying to make it to the United States.
And so with that crisis is born an
organization called Brothers to the
Rescue.
And what they were doing, they were
Cuban-American pilots who raised money
to buy small planes,
>> [music]
>> and they would fly over the Straits of
Florida between the Florida Keys and
[music] Cuba. And it's where many, many
people died trying to make their way to
the United States. So, they would fly
over the waters and they would spot
somebody, you know, on a raft and an
inner tube, what have you, and they
would call the Coast Guard for help. So,
this is a non-profit organization that
is attempting to help these [music]
people that are migrating en masse from
Cuba. Absolutely. They saved hundreds,
if not thousands, of people. They did
over 2,000 flights.
It was a big deal. The Coast Guard was
overwhelmed. The Coast Guard couldn't
handle the volume. There was a point in
the summer of 1994, Natalie. This is a
true story where there were about 2,000
people a day [music]
were showing up in Key West. Crazy.
>> [music]
>> So, why do I start with that? So, the
reason that's important is because at
some point the situation gets so dire
that the Clinton administration and the
Cuban government reach an accord. Cuba
will try to prevent people from leaving
the island and the United States agrees
that when people are caught, they're
going to be turned back. And so, what
does that mean? It means that the
Brothers to the Rescue kind of no longer
has a mission. Mhm. So, they change
their mission and they start getting a
little bit more provocative and poking a
stick in the eye of Fidel Castro. How
so? They started dropping leaflets over
Cuba. They dropped religious medallions,
doing things like that. They were a
little bit more protest actions as
opposed to rescue missions. The Cuban
government was furious.
They felt like this was an illegal
incursion into their airspace. They kept
on turning to the Clinton administration
saying, "You guys got to put a stop to
this."
Everybody and their mother warns the
organization, "You guys stop. This is
going to blow up in your face."
And the founder of the organization,
who's a man named Jose Basulto, he felt
really strongly that this was his right.
This was his right as a Cuban, as a
Cuban American, and he was going to
continue those flights. And he did. And
what happened?
>> [music]
>> So, one day, February 24, 1996,
he left an airport outside of Miami. He
and two other planes left,
and they fly down to Cuba.
That day, [music]
they did cross what's known as the 24th
parallel. It's international airspace,
[music]
but to the Cubans, they shouldn't have
been there. And so, the Cubans on air
traffic They're on air traffic control,
and Jose Basulto, who's the founder of
Brothers to the Rescue, as he's supposed
to, he announces [music] himself to the
air traffic control, and he says,
"Good afternoon. This is Jose Basulto
from Brothers to the Rescue. You know,
it's a beautiful day up in the skies
above Havana."
And the Cuban air traffic control
responds to him saying, "You know, if
you're below the 24th parallel, that's
an activated zone." That's what the word
that they used.
>> [music]
>> And he says, "This is my right as a free
Cuban." And they continue their journey.
And [music] so, the Cuban government,
the Cuban military, shot two of the
planes out of the sky, killing four
[music] people, including three US
citizens.
I can't even describe for you the sense
of shock throughout South Florida. You
were covering at the time, right,
Frenchie? I actually attended a friend
of mine wanted to go to the memorial
service at the Orange Bowl, which was a
big football stadium that we used to
have, and it was really dramatic. I
mean, it was hard to not feel
the emotion in the room. I I remember so
clearly, they started calling out the
names
of the guys, you know, Pablo Morales,
and everybody cried out together.
Armando Alejandre,
presente. I mean, I remember it today
like it happened yesterday. It was a a
really dramatic
moment for Miami
and for the United States. Right. And
this ties to Raul Castro because I
assume this is when he's Secretary of
Defense. Is that right? He was the
defense minister, and he gave the order.
I mean, I don't think that there's too
much doubt about that because MIG pilots
in Cuba are not going to be shooting
planes out of the sky without very clear
chain of commands orders.
>> [snorts]
>> And just explain why, if it was so
clear, didn't the US bring charges
against him then?
I've asked that same question to a
number of former federal prosecutors,
and the sense that I got was it would
just be really destabilizing to
diplomatic relations, even though we
didn't really have any, and
destabilizing in the region.
Okay. Obviously now there is the
political will to indict Raul Castro,
who we should say is a 94-year-old man.
He was once the president of Cuba, but
he's not anymore. But what you're saying
is that targeting him is part of what
you've already told us the last time you
came on the show, which is there has
been this escalating pressure campaign
by the Trump administration on the Cuban
regime. You see this as another step in
that. Absolutely, Natalie. I do see this
as a the latest step in that escalating
campaign. The Trump administration cut
off oil to Cuba.
Last week they announced they don't have
any reserves left. That means places
like Havana have are going 22 hours a
day without electricity. We keep asking
people, "What's it like when the power
goes out that long?" And I've gotten a
very similar answer several times. They
said, "No, no, no, it's not when the
power goes out that's the problem. It's
when the power comes on." Because the
power comes on at maybe 11:00 at night
or 12:00 and you got to jump out of bed
and you have to charge your phone, you
have to charge your laptop. And if
you're, you know, a family, you know, a
head of a household, you're getting a
pot of rice and beans on the stove to
cook the next day's meals. You're
hearing really, really dramatic stories
like that. People having to walk hours
and hours to their jobs. People who are
not able to work because their work
depends on having electricity and having
internet. It's a really terrible
situation. And when you talk to Cubans
on the island, who do they blame for
this? Do they blame the US or their own
government? I would say that the answer
to that tends to be generational.
I think older people are blaming the
United States. You know, the the talking
points from the government is certainly
that this is all the United States'
fault.
And the younger people are much more apt
to blame the Cuban government for the
mistakes that it's made during the
management of its country that led to
this fiasco. Okay, and what about the
reaction inside of the Cuban government?
What are they saying about this vice
grip that the Trump administration has
on them? They say it's an illegal
I think they've used the word genocide,
that it's going to lead to a bloodbath,
and that it will be the United States'
fault.
They don't recognize any errors that
they've ever made, and they 100% see
this as the fault of the Trump
administration. And this is a group of
people who are used to weathering hard
times and still holding on to power,
kind of fighting through. And it sounds
like they're still doing that.
It's been 67 years, and they have had
really severe hardship in the past, and
they've always weathered. And I think a
lot of people
feel that maybe the Trump administration
is underestimating the degree to which
these people will want to hang on to
power at any cost.
>> [music]
>> After the break, my colleague Julian
Barnes takes us inside the US
government's broader strategy in Cuba.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right [music] back.
Julian, you cover the US intelligence
community, and you've been reporting on
this pressure campaign and the role of
the CIA in amping that up. So, just tell
us what you've learned. What is the end
game in Cuba?
Well, we don't know what the exact end
game is here.
We don't know exactly what the US wants.
But, what's clear is that the pressure
is only going to increase.
This indictment is just the next step in
that, right? Like, it is a message
to the Cuban government that what
happened in Venezuela could happen in
Cuba.
Just want to pause on that, because I
think that is a big question that's been
hanging over all of this for those of us
watching.
Is this a prelude to what we saw in
Venezuela, where Nicolas Maduro was
indicted by the US government and then
was extracted by the US military. Is
that what this is about? It's very
important to note that our reporting
shows that President Trump wants the
option. He wants the option to do a
military extraction
to get Raul Castro, to put pressure on
the Cuban government.
You saw Todd Blanch raise that. He
talked about how would they get Castro,
right? And he talked about it being a
Pentagon issue.
That said, it's also important to note
that there aren't a lot of special
operations forces in the region. There
aren't special operations forces that we
know of that have been training for this
kind of operation. Cuba is very
different than Venezuela. The
circumstances are different.
It seems that a actual military
extraction of Castro
is pretty remote. You know, all the
special operations forces are still in
the Middle East. They're still geared up
to possible action against Iran, right?
You have to reset and come back for
Cuba. And it wouldn't necessarily have
the same effect. Like, Nicolas Maduro
was the official president of Venezuela.
Pulling him out triggered a change in
leadership. It allowed Vice President
Delcy Rodriguez to become the acting
president, to take power.
Raul Castro is a very important figure
in Cuba. He is very politically
influential. But if you grabbed him, it
wouldn't change any official leadership,
right? The Cuban government would
continue on. Right. Everybody formally
in charge would remain formally in
charge because they would still be in
the country. Right. And so, when you
talk to outside experts,
it is that reason that in the end they
see this as a threat, as pressure,
as a signal more than a sign of what is
to come. Okay. If it's appropriately
[snorts]
viewed as a threat, as a kind of chip in
these negotiations, in this game of
chicken that's happening,
to what end? Like, what does the US
actually want from Cuba? Is the goal
really wholesale regime change?
They've been a little unclear in their
public comments about this. And
certainly the Cuban government wants to
know what the US demands are.
But, we did in recent days start to get
some answers. John Ratcliffe, the CIA
director, last week took a trip to Cuba,
first Trump cabinet official to go down
there.
He delivered a message to the grandson
of Raul Castro, the interior minister,
and the head of Cuba's intelligence
services.
And he talked vaguely about economic and
political change, but he also said that
Cuba can't be a platform for America's
adversaries.
And the Cubans knew exactly what he was
talking about. That was a reference to
the Chinese intelligence post and the
Russian military posts that are on Cuba.
These are installations the Russians and
the Chinese use to intercept
communications inside the US.
>> Mhm. They are listening to Southcom.
They may be listening up at Central
Command. These are very important
military bases, and the US wants them
closed. And
this is a concrete ask, and it is
something the Cubans could do, right?
This is a step that they could take.
There is a path to
reduce that intelligence collection
there, to either close the base or limit
the number of people there, or kind of
restrict it. Radcliffe basically told
the Cubans, "Look, if you want to do a
deal with us, you got to kick our
adversaries out. They're spying on us
from your country. They have to go."
What else did he ask for? Well, the
economic and political demands were a
lot more vague, but we are getting a
sense of the kinds of things the US
wants to see. Mhm. And they range from
more extreme to easier things to do, but
they start off with reducing the power
of the military-industrial-backed
conglomerate that controls a huge chunk
of the Cuban economy.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> It could mean pushing more pragmatic,
less dogmatic politicians forward.
And it also could be a step toward free
elections, right? Like, you could see
the US pushing for elections at the
local level to make those more
meaningful. And that would be a real
win. It would not be regime change. It
would not be a total change in communist
rule, but it would be a meaningful step
forward. And would one of the smaller,
more incremental of those demands
be seen as a real success by the Trump
administration. I mean, in Venezuela,
they had this trophy of Nicolas Maduro
being brought to the US to theoretically
face justice. In this case, if they
aren't going to extract Castro, and
that's largely a symbolic move, if the
goal is really these more modest
changes, you could see the
administration running the risk of being
seen as
making a compromise with an
authoritarian government in Cuba while
allowing them to remain in power, no?
That is a very important point and one
that we can't lose sight of.
Inside the United States, there is a big
constituency, an important constituency,
an influential constituency for regime
change in Cuba. Cuban Americans have
wanted for years and years to end
communist control of Cuba. Anything that
is short of that is going to feel
inadequate. On the other hand,
the Trump administration knows that
sometimes when they reach for the big
goal, they fall short. And when they
reach for the smaller,
they can be more successful. I assume
when you're referring to reaching for a
big and difficult to achieve goal,
you're talking about Iran. Yes.
If you remember
on the night of the Iran war this year,
President Trump delivered a video
address to the nation, and he talked
expansively about war goals. He talked
about regime change. He called on the
Iranian people to rise up. Right. And
pushing for regime change is not a
narrow mission. It is not something that
is easy to achieve. It's something that
the US has struggled with in war after
war. They can do it, but it usually
requires a very big ground force and
unleashes forces that are out of
anyone's control. Mhm. Iran is a mess.
Like, they don't have a peace deal
that's lasting yet.
They're contemplating starting strikes
again.
The supreme leader has been killed, but
the government is as hardline as ever.
They are not backing down from their
nuclear program demands. And if you look
at President Trump's other foreign
military adventures, foreign operations,
they've been much more narrowly cast
with a very specific goal
to kill a specific leader, to bomb a
specific nuclear site, or in the
Venezuela case, to capture Nicolas
Maduro.
When he has drawn the goals narrowly, he
has seen more success.
And so, if you look at Cuba, the kind of
long-term goal of many Cuban Americans
of a Cuba free of communism, that's
going to be harder to achieve. But, if
you look for more narrow goals,
reduction of the power of the
military-industrial state,
incremental steps toward elections,
those are achievable things. You could
make meaningful
progress. Even so, Julian, you more than
anyone know that Cuba has been in the
sights of the CIA for a very long time.
So, why would the administration take
this on right now, given everything
you're saying, given that the
administration is already in the middle
of a war in the Middle East, that people
are already skeptical of what the
administration is doing abroad?
Why do this now?
Well,
as you just said, Cuba has been a thorn
in America's side for decades and
decades. This is not some adventure that
came out of this administration's head,
right? There have been generation of
American leaders who have tried to
change the government in Cuba. It is
something that is very important to a
powerful constituency in the United
States.
And Trump sees himself as someone who
can cut through
>> [music]
>> bureaucracy, as someone who can solve
problems that have bedeviled the United
States for years.
He's someone who has little patience for
>> [music]
>> progress or history, who believes
through the force of will he can fix
them or change them.
And also, we do have Iran right now, and
Iran looks like a really difficult
problem. And all of a sudden, he's got
Cuba, and his pressure campaign is
working better than they thought.
[music] So, there's a sense here, among
some in the administration,
that Cuba could be the success that
helps them move past the morass
>> [snorts]
>> of Iran.
Trump [music] may essentially just be
looking for a win, you're saying. If we
know anything about Donald Trump,
>> [music]
>> he's always looking for a win.
>> Well, Julian, thank you so much for
coming on. We really appreciate it.
Thanks for having me.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right [music] back.
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
>> [music]
>> On Wednesday, two police officers who
defended the US Capitol against a
pro-Trump mob on January 6th
>> [music]
>> challenged the constitutionality of a
new $1.8 billion fund [music] that they
warned could reward those who
participated in the attack. Their
lawsuit will answer the question of
whether anyone has [music] the legal
standing to stop the Trump
administration from creating the
controversial fund. That fund is
expected to make payments to Trump
supporters, [music] including January
6th rioters, who claim their
prosecutions were politically motivated.
>> [music]
>> And What I realized was a lot of
Americans who were not homophobic, but
thought they were supposed to be. And as
more of us came out and our reality
confronted the prejudice,
uh, we we made great gains. Barney
Frank, the blunt-talking [music]
former congressman from Massachusetts,
who for decades was the most prominent
gay politician in America, and who
[music] wrote the most sweeping overhaul
of US financial regulations since the
Great Depression, has died. He was
[music] 86.
His signature legislation, the
Dodd-Frank law, passed after the 2008
financial crisis. [music]
It regulated derivatives that had
worsened the crisis, imposed new rules
on large [music] banks, and created the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau as
an industry watchdog.
Asked about complaints [music] from
business leaders about the law, Frank
scoffed. Well, hate to say this,
but what I the impression I get most is
that their feelings are hurt. Oh, you
were rude to us. You said we were fat
cats. You hurt our feelings. Uh, get
over it. I mean, I I
I'm I'm in the kind of business where
people say rude things about us all the
time. No, I I've said that to them.
Today's episode was produced Ricky
Nvetsky [music]
and Diana Wynn with help from Lindsey
Garrison.
It was edited [music] by MJ Davis Lynn
and Michael Benwah. Contains music by
Elizabeth E tube, Marion Lozano, Pat
McCusker and Dan Powell.
Our theme music is by Wonderly. This
episode was engineered by Chris Wood.
That's it for the daily. [music] I'm
Natalie Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.